Date: Thu, 9 Oct 2003 19:09:54 -0700 (PDT)
From: Mary Loehr <moongoddessmary58@yahoo.com>
To: mccann@watson.org
Subject: Bike ride

Dear friends and family,

I'm writing to tell you about a family that needs support, and the
work they're doing with their child with special needs.  Catherine
Johnson and Francis Vanek, who live in Ithaca, have two children.  The
older of these is Ray.  He is almost eight years old.  Ray was a
seemingly normal, bright baby and toddler, but when he was three, he
began to have a lot of bizarre and very challenging behaviors.  By the
time he was four he would often go entire days without making eye
contact with anyone.  He would stand at the door and bark for hours,
he was aggressive with other children, especially his little sister,
and in short he seemed unable to cope with simple things that came
naturally to most children.  When he was five, he was diagnosed with
Autistic Spectrum Disorder.

Catherine and Francis have done a lot of reading, research, and
experimentation, and have found some therapies that have really helped
Ray, and their whole family, profoundly.  One of these therapies is
based on a program in Massachusetts called the Option Institute.  The
founders of the Option Institute had a severely autistic son, in the
1970's.  They were told to give up on him and put him in an
institution.  They weren't willing to do this.  They decided to do
everything in their power to reach their son and invite him to join
the social world, and they began by meeting him where he was at.  If
he had zero eye contact and spun plates all day, they decided to trust
that he was doing the best he could, and to join him to let him know
he was completely accepted.  The wife in the family sat with him every
day and did what he did.  He spun plates.  She spun plates.  After
hundreds of hours of joining, one day she noticed a very quick glance
in her direction, and they built on that.  After a while he was able
to look at people fully, eventually to speak, laugh, and interact like
any other young child.  By meeting him where he was at and totally
accepting him, they inspired their son to come out of his interior
world.  He began talking and now, as an adult, is a happy, vibrant,
very intelligent person with a successful career.

Catherine and Francis have decided to use this program in their home.
They built a special room.  They have volunteers come in and work with
Ray for two hour chunks.  The volunteers are trained and supervised by
Catherine.  They learn to meet Ray where he's at, with total
acceptance and love, and then when he meets them, they offer him some
challenges so that he can develop new skills.  Ray has come such a
long way since his parents began this intensive program! He used to be
constantly either overstimulated (hyper, barking) or completely
withdrawn.  He would make very little eye contact and his speech was
either recitations or loops (same basic conversation over and over.)
He now makes tons of eye contact, initiates conversations, appreciates
jokes, can write letters, and is on the verge of reading.  What a
change!

This past year Catherine and Francis have also been taking him to a
doctor in Rhinebeck, NY who is a specialist in biomedical approaches
to autism and related disorders.  Ray is now on a program of
nutritional support to correct for severe metabolic anomalies and
deficiencies.  He has been treated for candidiasis, and will very
likely be treated for a heavy metal (mercury) toxicity in his system
that was discovered by lab work.  These treatments have been extremely
helpful, but insurance will not pay for them because they still
classify them as experimental even though thousands of children have
now been helped by these methods.

Ray is making rapid progress, but he still has many challenges.

I'm writing to ask you to contribute to a ride around the Cayuga Lake
to raise money to help Ray's family.  They want to continue the
medical treatments that insurance will not pay for.  And they would
like to bring in a specialist/mentor twice a year to both work with
Ray and with the team of volunteers.  The person they have in mind,
Sean, has already come three times.  He has a rapport with Ray and is
an inspiring teacher.  He helps the volunteers figure out where Ray is
at and where he needs to go next in his development.

We will be riding around Cayuga Lake on Saturday, October 11! We hope
to have about a dozen riders and of course hope for that glorious fall
weather that can be like magic.

In peace and with love, Mary

PS, checks can be made out to Mary Loehr and sent to 125 Park Pl. #2,
Ithaca, 14850.
