Book recommendation for begrudging FreeBSD administrator

I use FreeBSD on my home computer for almost exclusively one reason:
it's stable.  I had been a Mac user (1985-1997), but when I saw how
reliable a friend's FreeBSD machine was by comparison, I switched.

One thing I did for the Mac that I never did for FreeBSD is figure out
how it works.  I'm a competent UN*X user and do a lot of programming,
but I have only a foggy notion of what's in all those /sys /var /etc
directories.  My hope was that I could install FreeBSD out of the box,
as well as the few programs I want, and then never touch anything for
which you need root access ever again.  I expected that FreeBSD in a
working state would never change into a non-working state if I didn't
touch it.

Well, FreeBSD works wonderfully... as long as I don't try to talk to
the outside world.  Getting sound to work was an epic struggle, and my
computer is now in a state where sound will work--- for hours or days
after startup, and then mysteriously stop working.  (No error
messages; just no sound.)  Now for another project I'm working on, I
need a scanner.  I (my wife and I) successfully got a USB scanner to
work through SANE, but on some reboots, the device node doesn't work.
The latter is somehow related to gimp locking up the computer (I can't
even switch to another tty to kill something).  Once, recompiling the
kernel and re-making the device nodes seemed to fix it, but then it
didn't on another occasion.  And finally, running cdplay will "open
too many files" and I can't do anything until I log out and back in
again.

I've been putzing around long enough--- I need to actually understand
my operating system.  But I don't have the time that I did when I was
thirteen, so I'm not going to figure it out by experimentation.  Could
anyone recommend a concise book on administrating a one-user FreeBSD
machine?

(By the way, my FreeBSD is version 4.2.  And I'm not upgrading without
a VERY, VERY good reason.)

comp.unix.bsd.freebsd
