Hello, this is James M. Pivarski.  I was driving Maureen Conway on the
night that she got a ticket for not wearing her seatbelt, and I write
this letter as a witness.  (I am unable to be in court today because I
am out of the country.)

That morning, Maureen had borrowed a friend's van (Steve ____), in
which Steve had stored a large number of drums to be used at the
Grassroots Festival.  Because of the muddy conditions on Maureen's
property, the van got stuck in her driveway.  Unable to contact Steve
or the other members of his band (Were they performers?  I don't
know...), Maureen called me to help her drive the instruments to
Grassroots.  We loaded the drums from Steve's van to my car, and with
them we drove to the festival.

When we first got in the car, I noticed that Maureen had forgotten to
put on her seat-belt, but with everything we had to think about, I
forgot to mention this in the two seconds it would have taken to do
so.

We arrived at Grassroots and were stopped by a police block, where
Maureen was ticketed for not wearing her seatbelt.  The officer
himself seemed upset about issuing a ticket in this case, but reminded
us that he "was not allowed to give warnings" at the Grassroots
entrance.

			     *    *    *

I understand the need for a zero-tolerance policy at Grassroots to
control a potentially rowdy situation, and I understand the importance
of wearing seat-belts, and why it is a ticketable offense.  But the
circumstances of this ticket are beyond the punitive intention of the
law, for three reasons:

  1. Maureen is a habitual seat-belt wearer: it was the unusual
     situation of sitting in the passenger's seat, with so much to
     worry about (more than I've mentioned here) that caused it to
     slip both our minds.

  2. The purpose of the trip to Grassroots was utilitarian: we didn't
     go with the relaxed sense of judgement that makes strict rules
     necessary.

  3. This ticket is likely to be a financial burden on Maureen, who
     currently needs the funds to set up a shelter on her land in
     which to live.

As the driver, I'm not sure if I am responsible for seat-belt wearing
in my car--- if I am, I am willing to pay the fine.

			                          Sincerely,
			                          James M. Pivarski
