A Candidate From Russia Is in London With New Tale
By STEVEN LEE MYERS

Published: February 14, 2004

MOSCOW, Feb. 13 — Ivan P. Rybkin, the Russian presidential candidate
who disappeared for five days before resurfacing in Ukraine this week,
appeared in London on Friday and offered yet another explanation for
his bizarre absence, saying he had been drugged and kidnapped.

None of Mr. Rybkin's remarks could be corroborated, and his new
version contradicted statements he made after returning to Moscow on
Tuesday night and in a rambling radio interview the next day.
Advertisement

Mr. Rybkin said Friday at a news conference that he had been lured to
Ukraine's capital, Kiev, on the pretense of meeting with Aslan
Maskhadov, the Chechen separatist and one of Russia's most wanted men.

Mr. Rybkin, who served as a security adviser to Boris N. Yeltsin, was
involved in the peace talks that ended the first Chechen war in 1996
and has remained an advocate of talks to end the second war, which
began in 1999.

He said that after arriving at an apartment in Kiev, he felt drowsy
after having sandwiches and tea and then fell unconscious for what
turned out to be four days. When he awoke, he said, two armed men
showed him a compromising videotape of him that he refused to describe
except to say it was meant to intimidate him into silence.

Mr. Rybkin suggested that his kidnapping was an attempt to discredit
liberal challengers to President Vladimir V. Putin before the
presidential election on March 14 and that he could speak freely only
now about what had happened to him.

"I do not know who did it, but I know who has benefited from it," he
said, according to the official Itar-Tass news agency.

Mr. Rybkin left Moscow by train on Feb. 5, prompting his wife and
campaign aides to report his disappearance to the police, who then
began a search. He surfaced on Feb. 10, calling his campaign manager
to say he had gone to Kiev to relax.

He said he would not return to Moscow before the election but would
continue to campaign from London.

"To be able to tell people the truth, from now on I will conduct my
campaign from abroad," he said in a statement he read at his news
conference.


**************

Cyprus Greeks and Turks Agree on Plan to End 40-Year Conflict
By WARREN HOGE

Published: February 14, 2004

UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 13 — Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders on Friday
accepted Secretary General Kofi Annan's plan for ending the
decades-long division of Cyprus and pledged to negotiate reunification
in time for the island's May 1 entry into the European Union.

The deal between the Greek Cypriot president, Tassos Papadopoulos, and
his Turkish Cypriot counterpart, Rauf Denktash, was reached after
three days of talks at the United Nations, and brought forth
expressions of hope that a solution to one of the world's most
intractable conflicts was at hand.
Advertisement

"I really believe that after 40 years, a political settlement is at
last in reach," Mr. Annan said in announcing the pact.

Thomas G. Weston, the United States special coordinator for Cyprus
since 1999, said, "It is almost certain now that there will be a
settlement on the island of Cyprus."

Interviewed after meeting with Mr. Annan, he said: "There have been
numerous attempts in the past, and they all led to failure until
today. Now we have the procedure and methodology which has given us
exceptionally strong prospects to reach agreement before Cyprus enters
the European Union."

If successful, the plan will put an end to a stalemate that on a
number of occasions brought Greece and Turkey, both NATO members, to
the verge of war and, in 1974, to a conflict that ended with the
division of the island.

With Cyprus scheduled to join the European Union on May 1, pressures
to end the standoff grew increasingly intense. Unless reunification
was achieved, only the Greek Cypriot government would be entitled to
enter.

That reality focused negotiators, with Turkey in particular lending
strong backing to the last-ditch effort, well aware that failure in
Cyprus would jeopardize its own active candidacy to become the first
Muslim nation to join the union.

Mr. Annan had invested substantial personal capital in breaking the
impasse on the Mediterranean island, and the arrangement makes him the
final binding arbiter of any last-minute disagreements on what is
known as "the Annan plan."

According to the plan, the two sides will reconvene on Thursday in
Cyprus under a tight timetable calling for them to agree by March 22
on reunification language that can be put to simultaneous island-wide
referendums in April.

Technical committees on laws and treaties will work out details, also
starting next week, and the United Nations will preside over a
separate committee on the financial and economic aspects of
reunification.

If the two parties are unable to reach agreement themselves, the pact
calls for Turkey and Greece to enter the talks. If differences still
persist by March 29, Mr. Annan will have the power "to fill in the
blanks," according to United Nations diplomats. The proposed date of
the referendums is April 21.

"Very much as a last resort, the secretary general, with reluctance,
will have the last word," said Álvaro de Soto, the Peruvian diplomat
who is Mr. Annan's special adviser on Cyprus and who will lead next
week's talks. He said he believed that the parties had the will and
resources to complete the settlement themselves, and he "devoutly"
hoped that Mr. Annan's intervention would not be necessary.

Hostilities between Cyprus's Greek and Turkish populations have
required United Nations peacekeepers on the island since 1964 and led
to formal division in 1974, when Turkey seized the island's northern
third in response to a pro-Greek coup seeking to unify Cyprus with
Greece. In 1983, the breakaway state became the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus, recognized internationally only by Turkey, which
keeps 30,000 troops there.

An intensive round of reunification talks under Mr. Annan last year
produced a United Nations blueprint for a single state with Greek and
Turkish Cypriot federated regions, but it collapsed in April when
Mr. Denktash refused to put it to a vote of his people and balked at
the appointment of Mr. Annan as a final arbiter.

Last week, the secretary general invited the two sides to New York to
make a last try before the pending European Union entry, and he
received strong outside backing from the United States, a supporter of
Turkey's European aspirations, and the three so-called guarantor
nations: Greece, Turkey and Britain.

"The agreement is the result of cooperative efforts among the parties,
particularly Greece and Turkey, who have not always exercised such
cooperative efforts in the past," Mr. Weston said. He confirmed
reports that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell had been in direct
contact with the principal parties in recent days as the talks
appeared to falter.

Mr. Denktash, accused of obstructionism in the past, surprised the
negotiators by dropping his objection to Mr. Annan's role as final
judge and by saying his main demand was more active involvement in the
later stages by Turkey and Greece. "We were impressed this time that
there was a different mind-set," Mr. de Soto said.

But Mr. Papadopoulos came back with a demand that the European Union
itself become an active participant in the talks, a request that was
dismissed as meddlesome by the Turkish side.

Athens, Ankara, London and Washington engaged in busy overnight
diplomacy, and a European Union official in Brussels said Friday that
they had no interest in becoming directly involved, thus taking the
air out of the Greek Cypriot proposal.

The statement read by Mr. Annan on Friday promised only "assurances of
the European Union to accommodate a settlement and the offer of
technical assistance by the European Commission."

******************

More Than 50 Gay Couples Are Married in San Francisco
By CAROLYN MARSHALL

Published: February 13, 2004

SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 12 — Two lesbians who have been living together
for more than 50 years were the first to marry at city hall Thursday
under a new city directive, leading the way for a host of other
same-sex marriages and setting the stage for a heated debate over the
legality of the ceremony.
Advertisement

California family law states that "only marriage between a man and a
woman is valid or recognized in California." Nonetheless, the San
Francisco county clerk issued the women, Phyllis Lyon, 79, and Del
Martin, 83, an official marriage certificate and said the act was
legal. They were married by the county assessor.

By late Thursday afternoon, at least 50 other gay couples had been
married and others, some dressed in wedding gowns and dark suits, were
waiting their turn.

"The marriages will be recognized in San Francisco, but I can't say
how they will be viewed anywhere else," said the county clerk, Nancy
Alfaro.

Mayor Gavin Newsom had urged the county clerk's office this week to
begin issuing the marriage certificates, asserting that the state
Constitution prohibits discrimination in such matters.

The clerk had not been expected to act on the request until next week,
but the schedule was moved forward when the Campaign for California
Families, a group that opposes gay marriage, announced it would file a
lawsuit against the city and county on Friday.

Ms. Lyon said "it was exciting" to get married, even though the couple
had no rings, had not written vows and just found out Wednesday night
that the ceremony could take place.

Although Ms. Lyon, who met Ms. Martin in 1953, said she opposed
marriage for straight and gay couples during the women's movement, she
said it had become an increasingly important political issue for gay
men and lesbians in the last two years.

"It's of crucial importance for the movement," Ms. Lyon said. "We are
fairly well united behind this because it's being fought against so
hard by the other side. If we let them beat us down on this one, it
will be a long time before we make other advances."

Mathew D. Staver, president and general counsel of Liberty Counsel,
the lawyers for the group that plans to sue, said the marriage
certificates issued Thursday were "not worth the paper they are
written on."

He added that Mr. Newsom was "giving the impression that mayors are
above the law."

Hallye Jordan, a spokeswoman for the California attorney general, Bill
Lockyer, said Mr. Lockyer had not been asked to render an opinion on
the matter, but that he was investigating the constitutional issues
surrounding gay marriage.

Asked if the marriage certificates issued in San Francisco were legal,
Ms. Jordan said, "We don't know."

Kate Kendell, executive director of the National Center for Lesbian
Rights, served as a witness to the Lyon-Martin marriage.

Ms. Kendell acknowledged that under California law marriage must be
between people of opposite sex, but she said the requirement was
unconstitutional.

"It is in the highest order of civic responsibility when you see a law
that does not treat your citizens equally," Ms. Kendell said, "to make
a stand."


**************

U.N. Envoy, Visiting Iraq, Backs Cleric on Elections
By EDWARD WONG

Published: February 13, 2004

BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 12 — A senior United Nations envoy said Thursday
that he supported a powerful Shiite cleric's call for elections to
install a new sovereign government, but did not offer a specific
timetable.

"Elections are the only way to bring Iraq out of the tunnel," the
envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, told reporters after meeting Grand Ayatollah
Ali al-Sistani in the holy city of Najaf.
Advertisement

Mr. Brahimi, who is leading a United Nations team that arrived this
week to assess the possibility of holding direct elections, did not
say whether he thought elections could be held by May 31. That is the
date by which the Bush administration hopes to put a transitional
national assembly in place to appoint the new government.

Though the Bush administration has yet to acknowledge that security
also poses a problem for elections, many experts say the country is
too unstable to stage a fully democratic process.

An explosion killed one American soldier and wounded two others in a
Baghdad suburb late Thursday, The Associated Press reported Friday.

The blast occurred at 10:40 p.m. on Thursday in the Abu Ghraib part of
the capital, striking a patrol by members of the 16th Military Police
Brigade, said Cpl. Craig Stowell, an American military spokesman.

The American military said Thursday that two soldiers from the First
Armored Division were killed in a roadside bomb attack in Baghdad
during a patrol on Wednesday night.

Ayatollah Sistani has been insisting on elections to appoint members
of the national assembly and strongly opposes the Bush
administration's plan for a caucus-style selection process. The White
House last month asked the United Nations secretary general, Kofi
Annan, to intervene because Ayatollah Sistani had said he would
seriously weigh the opinion of the United Nations.

After meeting with the ayatollah, Mr. Brahimi said "we are with him on
this 100 percent because elections are the best means to enable any
people to set up a state that serves their interest." Mr. Brahimi
added that "we also agree with his excellency that the elections must
be well prepared and well arranged and must be done under the best
possible circumstances to get the results that Ayatollah Sistani wants
and the people of Iraq and the U.N. want."

Fred Eckhard, the United Nations spokesman, said the United Nations
team had found a consensus among Iraqi leaders that elections were the
best way to establish a "fully representative and legitimate
government." But first, he said, the right "technical, security and
political conditions" must be in place.

Mr. Brahimi's statements on Thursday morning make it increasingly
apparent that the White House will have difficulty selling Iraqis on
its plan for caucus-style balloting.

American officials have indicated they are willing to make adjustments
to their plan, but want to stick to a deadline of June 30 to hand over
sovereignty. Direct elections are not possible before then, they have
argued, because proper voter rolls and laws cannot be set up in time.

Ayatollah Sistani has said he is willing to postpone direct elections
if the United Nations team so recommends. What mechanism the United
Nations might suggest is unclear.

Dan Senor, a spokesman for the Coalition Provisional Authority, said
American administrators were still awaiting a report from the United
Nations.


*****************

Adventure or Inquiry? Two Visions of Cosmic Destiny
By DENNIS OVERBYE

Published: February 3, 2004

The best marriage of human spaceflight and science." That is how
Dr. John M. Grunsfeld, astronomer, astronaut and chief scientist of
NASA, described the Hubble Space Telescope when he announced last
month that the agency was canceling maintenance missions to the
telescope, which has dazzled the world with crisp visions of the
cosmos.

Like every marriage, this one has had its ups and downs, and it seems
to be ending like "The War of the Roses." NASA officials moved as
swiftly as assassins after President Bush ordered them to redirect
resources toward the Moon and Mars. Without service calls from shuttle
astronauts, the telescope is likely to die in orbit around 2007,
making science the first casualty of the new era. Not an auspicious
beginning.

NASA officials said it was a matter of safety, citing a recommendation
of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to send the shuttle only
to the space station, unless tools are developed to inspect and repair
fragile thermal tiles in flight.

The chairman of the accident board, Adm. Harold W. Gehman Jr., is now
reviewing the decision, which outraged astronomers and others. "Bush's
`New Vision' is a sharp stick in the eye," said The New Yorker.

The shuttle and the space telescope were a marriage of convenience,
the visions driving them composing a sort of yin-yang heartbeat inside
NASA.

In the 1970's, astronomers, who had long dreamed of a telescope above
the blurry atmosphere, had no choice but to build a telescope that
could be launched and maintained from the coming space shuttle.

Proponents of the shuttle then argued that their winged spaceship
would be a great boon to science, a claim that came true in 1993 when
spacewalking astronauts corrected a flaw in Hubble's
optics. Subsequent service calls by the shuttle have continued to hone
and improve the telescope's capabilities.

As I pondered the imminent demise of this heavenly relationship, I was
drawn to a pair of images, each emblematic in its own way of the era
and of an attitude toward space and humanity's place in it.

One was taken from the shuttle Challenger 20 years ago this month. It
shows Capt. Bruce C. McCandless floating alone in space above a blue
Earth, like a human satellite or a lonely star child. He was testing a
nitrogen-propelled backpack designed to allow astronauts to buzz
around freely in space.

The other, taken by the Hubble in 1995 and nicknamed the Pillars of
Creation, shows huge columns of primordial gas being boiled away to
reveal nests of hot new stars being born in the Eagle nebula some
6,500 light-years from here. It is a vision of Genesis as a continuing
project.

Together these pictures represent the poles of the space program, the
dialectic that has driven debate about it since the rockets began to
blast forth from Cape Canaveral half a century ago. One is the drama
of human exploration: footprints and golf balls on the Moon,
spacewalks, zero-gravity shenanigans, space sickness, claustrophobic
dramas in a tin can as humans learn like fish crawling out of the sea
to adapt to a new environment. This is the inspirational adventure
that serves as the loss leader, loosening Congressional purses for
other space activities.

The other is science, the endless inquiry into the brute divine
processes through which we originated, performed by talented robots
embodying all the ingenuity and persistence of their human designers
and minders back on Earth, able to go where no human could tread,
through radiation belts and galactic silence, to see what human vision
could not even imagine until the holy pixels came beaming down from
orbit.

In one of them, space has become an arena where humans pursue their
destiny. And the elements of the universe take their meaning from
their relation to people: Mars is a theater, a science-fiction one;
the Moon is a way station, or an observatory. We own the universe, we
mine it, settle it, play in it, build great floating edifices between
the stars.

In the other, humankind is not present at all, except as some
possibility eons in the future, a consequence of primordial processes
virtually biblical in dimension. The universe owns us; we emerge
inevitably or by luck from the chipping of DNA by cosmic rays,
chemical currents in space, the bubbling of volcanic mud.

 Captain McCandless's test flight came at an almost giddy moment in
 the history of the shuttle program. The Challenger and Columbia
 disasters were in the future. More and more people were flying in
 space and flying in a style to which they were not accustomed.

Astronauts loved the shuttle, and if you have ever spent time in a
museum examining the cramped capsules that took humans to the Moon,
it's not hard to see why. They had toilets and showers and and hot
food and the dignity of actually flying back to Earth, not being
dropped like a sack of potatoes.

In the picture, Captain McCandless is above the Earth, sunlit in his
white suit, tiny and fragile but triumphant all the same. Flying was
fun.

Since then, most of the thrills in space have come from robots like
the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe that is mapping the remnants
of the Big Bang, the rovers on Mars and of course Hubble, our
clear-eyed sentry on creation.

President Bush has vowed to change that course. "Human beings are
headed into the cosmos," he said last month, spinning visions of Moon
bases and Mars explorers.

At one extreme, the Bushian vision of space is the universe as a thing
to be exploited, as property. But another branch on this tree leads to
the concept of stewardship, to a role of gods, as Stewart Brand put it
in the Whole Earth Catalog long long ago, in charge of Spaceship
Earth. In many ways this is no less arrogant than the idea of
subdividing Mars before we have ever been there.

Surely it is folly to pretend that humans are in charge of their own
evolution, let alone the rest of the universe. The asteroid or the
killer virus could show up tomorrow. If we venture into the universe
under the pretense of being owners, we are likely to get a rude
awakening.

Science, of course, is not without its own sense of arrogance. We can
figure out the answer; our minds are up to the challenge of
understanding existence. Although why that should be so is the
ultimate humbling mystery. "The most incomprehensible thing about the
universe is that it is comprehensible," Einstein once said.

The tension between owning the universe and being owned by it is
familiar to anyone who ever bought an old house. Whether it is our
destiny to be Nietzschean overlords of this house of stars or
temporary inhabitants is a mystery. Cosmologists admit they are
baffled by the role of life in the cosmos. The universe and its laws,
they have concluded, seem to be mysteriously intertwined. Life as We
Know It seems to depend on a miraculous and improbable juggling of the
numerical values of a few atomic constants.

Is life a lucky fluke? Are there zillions of different universes to
choose from? What is life, anyway?

Having raised this issue, I have to say that I have no answer. Are we
the lords of creation, or pond scum?

Not knowing is part of the fun, and I submit that it is our fate not
to know. Such ambiguity is the source of richness of drama, art, life,
perhaps even science. We are doomed — or privileged — to find our
meaning in questions, facing as clear-eyed as the Hubble the prospect
that answers will probably never be forthcoming.

In his book "The Life of the Cosmos," Dr. Lee Smolin, the physicist,
lamented the lack of a final unified theory. "When a child asks, What
is the world?" he wrote, "we literally have nothing to tell her."

Get used to it.


******************

Faulting U.S., Germany Frees a 9/11 Suspect
By DESMOND BUTLER

Published: February 6, 2004

HAMBURG, Germany, Feb. 5 — Citing a refusal by the United States to
allow testimony from a suspected member of Al Qaeda in its custody, a
German court on Thursday acquitted a former roommate of Mohamed Atta
who was accused of providing support to suicide pilots in the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Advertisement

The court cleared Abdelghani Mzoudi, the second suspect to be tried
for involvement in the attacks, of accessory to murder and membership
in Al Qaeda.

Mr. Mzoudi, 31, who arrived in Germany from his native Morocco in 1995
to study electrical engineering, sat quietly in a colorful ski sweater
as the presiding judge, Klaus Rühle, pronounced him a free man, if not
precisely an innocent one.

"You are acquitted," said the judge, glancing at the defendant, who
was allowed to leave jail in December. "Not because the court is
convinced of your innocence, but because the evidence was not enough
to convict you."

German prosecutors, who said they would appeal the verdict, had
already convicted another former roommate of Mr. Mzoudi, Mounir
el-Motassadeq, on the same charges and based on virtually the same
evidence. A German high court is scheduled to rule March 4 on an
appeal of that conviction, the first and only one of a Sept. 11
defendant anywhere.

Last week, the high court made clear that the evidence issued in
Mr. Mzoudi's trial would be a factor in their decision.

Prosecutors blamed the acquittal on the Bush administration's
reluctance to make captured terrorists available for testimony and to
allow prosecutors to make use of intelligence information on the
terrorist network. "They must have their reasons, which they did not
communicate to us," said the chief federal prosecutor, Kay Nehm, The
Associated Press reported. "I find this conduct by the United States
incomprehensible."

The Bush administration's stance could also imperil the criminal
prosecution of the only person facing trial in the United States on
charges of involvement in the Sept. 11 attacks. Zacarias Moussaoui, a
French citizen, is accused of repeated contacts with the same Hamburg
terrorist cell that Mr. Mzoudi was accused of supporting.

Family members of the victims of the Sept. 11 attacks, who had
registered as co-plaintiffs in the trial, had sought a last-minute
delay of the verdict on Thursday. They wanted the extra time to
question officials at the United States Justice Department about a new
legal approach being pursued in the Moussaoui trial that could make
more intelligence material available.

The delay was denied, and the families expressed outrage with American
officials' insistence on withholding witnesses and intelligence
information.

"Somebody dropped the ball," said one co-plaintiff, Stephen Push,
whose wife, Lisa Raines, was a passenger on American Airlines Flight
77, which was crashed by its hijackers into the Pentagon. "I have been
calling ceaselessly to ask why the intelligence has not been made
available in the German cases."

Reading the decision on Thursday, Mr. Rühle addressed families of
victims of the attacks directly.

"Many who have followed this trial in Germany and America will look on
this decision with incomprehension and bitterness," he said. "We
should make clear that we at no point lost sight of the fact that this
was about Sept. 11, one of the worst crimes in history."

Mr. Mzoudi declined to speak to reporters at the news conference, but
his lawyers expressed jubilation.

"This is a great day for justice," Michael Rosenthal, one of his
lawyers, said. "We're very proud of our justice system."

Hamburg officials have said they will seek to expel Mr. Mzoudi, who is
not a German citizen. His lawyers have said, however, that they will
file for his asylum in Germany on the grounds that he may face torture
in Morocco.

In the early days of the trial, which began in August, a Qaeda
informant testified that he had seen the defendant and Mr. Motassadeq
in a Qaeda training camp in Afghanistan. Members of Mr. Mzoudi's
defense team never denied that their client had indeed been in
Afghanistan.

 The defense further acknowledged that Mr. Mzoudi knew Mr. Atta, who
 is believed to have been the pilot who flew American Airlines Flight
 11 into the north tower of the World Trade Center, and had made
 financial transactions for an alleged member of Al Qaeda.

But on Thursday, Mr. Rühle dismissed these actions as "everyday
affairs," and said that the prosecution had not proven beyond doubt
that Mr. Mzoudi was aware of his associates' plans to carry out an
attack. "It appears that some of the preparation of the attacks was
not hidden from you," Mr. Rühle told the defendant. "However, the
opposite is also possible."
Advertisement

Under German terrorism laws existing at the time of the attacks,
specific knowledge of terrorist activity must be proved in order to
convict a defendant of conspiracy.

The prosecution's case against Mr. Mzoudi began to founder in December
after the German police submitted a letter to the court summarizing
intelligence gained from a captured Qaeda suspect, Ramzi bin al-Shibh,
who is believed to have been a member of the Hamburg cell and central
to the Sept. 11 plot.

According to the letter, Mr. bin al-Shibh told his American captors
that neither Mr. Mzoudi nor Mr. Motassadeq was aware of the planning
or the details of the attacks. Though the letter did not cite Mr. bin
al-Shibh by name or describe the conditions under which he was
interrogated, his identity was clear from the context.

The new evidence led Mr. Rühle to order Mr. Mzoudi's immediate release
from custody and to express frustration that repeated requests by the
court to American authorities for access to Mr. bin al-Shibh or to the
full transcripts of his interrogations were denied on national
security grounds.

Mr. Rühle echoed his own earlier concerns and noted that if there was
no way to question Mr. bin al-Shibh's claim, Mr. Mzoudi must be given
the benefit of the doubt. "The defendant must not bear the burden of
missing evidence," he said.

The acquittal of Mr. Mzoudi is also a setback for the German
government, which has asserted that terrorist suspects can be tried in
criminal courts rather than in military tribunals, which the United
States favor as a venue for many of the suspects it now has in
custody.

When Mr. Mzoudi was released in December, Attorney General John
Ashcroft expressed disappointment and criticized a Hamburg government
official for saying the American approach of preferring military
tribunals as "uncalled for."


*******************

In Court, AIM Members Are Depicted as Killers
By MONICA DAVEY

Published: February 5, 2004

RAPID CITY, S.D., Feb. 4 — The former companion of a leader in the
American Indian Movement clutched a single feather as she took the
witness stand in a federal court here on Wednesday and tearfully
depicted the movement's leaders as murderous.

In a full but silent courtroom, the witness, Ka-Mook Nichols, said
leaders of the militant Indian civil-rights group known as AIM had
orchestrated the death of one of its own members, Anna Mae Pictou
Aquash, nearly three decades ago. And Ms. Nichols implicated Leonard
Peltier, AIM's best-known member, in the earlier killing of two
federal agents, crimes for which Mr. Peltier has been sent to prison
for life.

Mr. Peltier, who has always maintained his innocence, has an
international following among those who believe he was framed by
federal authorities seeking revenge.

The trial, in its second day, will determine the fate of Arlo Looking
Cloud, a former low-level AIM member charged with killing Ms. Pictou
Aquash, another AIM member. But the testimony here stretched far
beyond this case, presenting a sweeping and frightening look at
violence and suspicion inside the militant movement that drew national
attention to southwest South Dakota in the 1970's.

"You would think the American Indian Movement was on trial," Vernon
Bellecourt, a spokesman for the movement, said angrily from his seat
in the front row of the gallery, which has been full of people who
remember those volatile clashes between Indians and federal
authorities: AIM sympathizers, residents from the Pine Ridge
Reservation where the occupation of Wounded Knee took place, and
federal agents, now mostly retired.

Mr. Bellecourt denied all accusations against the movement, and said
the latest revelations were merely another effort by the federal
authorities to hide their own wrongdoing. "It's virtually impossible,"
he said, "for an Indian to receive a fair trial in South Dakota."

Ms. Nichols, who had an 18-year relationship and four children with
Dennis Banks, a leader of AIM from its earliest days in the late
1960's, told jurors how she joined the movement as a high school
student living on Pine Ridge and never confided all she had seen until
now because she supported the group's goals — treaty recognition,
self-determination for Indians, a return to traditional ways.

"At the time I was committed to the movement and I believed in what
the movement stood for," said Ms. Nichols, now 48. "I never talked to
anybody about anything."

But on Wednesday, Ms. Nichols described details of the group's
wanderings around the country — those fleeing the authorities,
building bombs and planning their next moves. She also told how AIM
leaders worried that their own members might be spying for the
authorities.

She testified that the leaders, including Mr. Banks and Mr. Peltier,
strongly suspected Ms. Pictou Aquash, a Micmac Indian who left Canada
to join the movement, might be a federal informer. At an AIM
convention in June 1975, Ms. Nichols said, leaders openly discussed
that possibility.

Mr. Peltier once put a gun to Ms. Pictou Aquash's head, Ms. Nichols
testified, and demanded to know if she was a spy. Another time, he
talked about giving her truth serum, Ms. Nichols testified. All this
made Ms. Pictou Aquash angry and fearful, she said. "I knew she was
scared of Dennis and Leonard at that point."

Months later, on Feb. 24, 1976, Ms. Pictou Aquash's decomposing body
was found in a ravine on Pine Ridge. She had been shot in the head,
but the authorities said they could not identify her for several
weeks. The day the body was found, however, Mr. Banks called
Ms. Nichols and said Ms. Pictou Aquash had been turned up dead,
Ms. Nichols testified.

"From the day he called me, I started believing it was the American
Indian Movement that has something to do with it," she said.

Mr. Banks, who has been separated from Ms. Nichols since 1989, was
traveling and could not be reached for comment on Wednesday. But
Mr. Peltier's lawyer, Barry A. Bachrach, said his client considered
Ms. Nichols' testimony utterly false.

"He has no idea why she's saying this," Mr. Bachrach said in a phone
interview. "Anna Mae was not afraid of AIM or Leonard. Ka-Mook is
doing nothing but parroting government testimony."

Mr. Looking Cloud's lawyer, Tim Rensch, suggested that Ms. Nichols
might be seeking revenge on her former companion, Mr. Banks, because
he had once had an affair with Ms. Pictou Aquash. He also suggested
that she might be in it for money — the government has paid her
$42,000, partly for moving expenses to protect her from AIM members —
or even planning to write a book.

But on Wednesday, Ms. Nichols said she simply was telling the truth on
behalf of a dear friend, Ms. Pictou Aquash. One reason, she said, that
AIM leaders might have feared the possibility of spying so much was
that Ms. Pictou Aquash had witnessed sensitive information.

She said that she had been riding in a motor home with Ms. Pictou
Aquash, Mr. Peltier and others one day in 1975 when Mr. Peltier began
boasting about shooting the federal agents at Pine Ridge.

Ms. Nichols testified that Mr. Peltier made a gun with his fingers and
said that one agent had begged "for his life, but I shot him anyway."

Mr. Peltier, in a federal prison in Leavenworth, Kan., denies all
connection to the killings and to any boasting. "Why is she doing
this?" Mr. Bachrach said. "Leonard is baffled."

The defendant in this trial, Mr. Looking Cloud, seemed almost an
afterthought on Wednesday. In opening statements, his lawyer,
Mr. Rensch, acknowledged that Mr. Looking Cloud had been there with
other AIM members when Ms. Pictou Aquash was killed, but that he had
not participated or known what was coming.

Wearing glasses, with a braid running down his back, Mr. Looking
Cloud, 50, looked small and hunched at the defense table. His lawyer
said he quit AIM after what happened to Ms. Pictou Aquash, and wound
up drinking too much, living on the streets of Denver.


