Eager NASA Is Bringing Mars Down to Earth
By AMY HARMON

Published: January 27, 2004

Ryan Caron delivered his first status report on the second Mars rover roughly half an hour after it landed: "We did not encounter the strong winds that we did during Spirit's landing," he told a group of 50 assembled in a lecture hall in Worcester, Mass., for the early morning touchdown. "We were in near-constant communication."
Advertisement

No, Mr. Caron, a 19-year-old college freshman, does not work for NASA, despite his use of the first-person pronoun. But he is one of many Americans and others around the world expressing an unusual sense of ownership in the space agency's current Mars mission.

Since the rover Spirit landed on Mars three weeks ago, 32 million people have visited the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Web site, dwarfing the numbers of any other space event, including last year's space shuttle accident. The agency recorded four billion hits, one for each item called up on the site, as the visitors browsed through hundreds of pictures considering what rock to zoom in on. That was well over the number of hits recorded in the entire previous year.

Last weekend, tens of thousands of Mars fans went even further, gathering at planetariums, around television sets and in Internet chat rooms to monitor the scene inside the control room as the rover Opportunity landed.

The interest, experts say, is driven largely by the vast amount of information NASA is making available for the public. As a population acclimated to video games and cyberspace finds itself immersed in a not-so-virtual Martian reality, it is eagerly using familiar tools to explore the unknown.

Instead of merely admiring Mars, people are now interacting with it. And while the activity may be dominated by a core of self-avowed space geeks, they have been joined by novices %G—%@ nurses, real estate brokers, students and teachers %G—%@ drawn by the drama of the mission as well as the ease of access to it.

"When you're sitting there at your computer making choices about what angles to look at, you're not just a passive observer like you were with the moon landing," said Arthur Molella, director of the Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention and Innovation at the Smithsonian Institution. "It's a two-way kind of connection now, it's always there and it's on-demand. You can get up in the middle of the night and check in if you want."

The flow of updates from Mars has led to a new addiction among some Americans, who find themselves checking for news dozens of times a day. In interviews, many reported feeling depression and withdrawal symptoms when the Spirit stopped communicating last week.

The portal to Mars at marsrovers .nasa.gov/home/ includes nearly 1,000 Web pages filled with computer animations, panoramics and a catalog of other images, some in 3-D, published online almost as soon as the scientists receive them. (One manufacturer of 3-D glasses said it was receiving 1,000 self-addressed, stamped envelopes a day in response to an offer to send a free pair to Mars lovers.)

And about 250,000 people have downloaded free NASA software that lets them "drive" the Spirit through a simulated landscape modeled on the real data it has collected.

The glut of Mars information is a result of the agency's decision to try to bolster support %G—%@ and financing %G—%@ for the space program by getting the public more involved. But the agency is also being pushed by a technically literate population increasingly equipped with high-bandwidth Internet connections.

"We get a lot of questions, `Are we seeing everything the scientists see?' " said Jeanne Holm, chief knowledge architect for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, where the Mars operation is based. "They want to feel like they're there."

At a time when President Bush has proposed sending humans to Mars, some experts say the collective virtual connection to the planet may be enough for most people. The pursuit of human space colonies may seem less urgent, given the option of space adventure mediated by machines and operated by remote control.


Eager NASA Is Bringing Mars Down to Earth

Published: January 27, 2004

(Page 2 of 2)

"There has been an enduring idea that one day everyone would fly in space," said Howard McCurdy, author of "Space and the American Imagination" (Smithsonian, 1997). "But now young people are saying maybe we all go into space but we go mentally, virtually, electronically %G—%@ we don't go with our bodies. As the technology gets better, the virtual reality could get quite profound."
Advertisement

In some ways, it already is. As NASA scientists tried to pinpoint the landing location of the Spirit by matching the pictures it sent back to satellite images of the terrain, Tim McCollum's eighth-grade science students in Charleston, Ill., did the same. After making their own guess, they came in every day wondering if NASA had released the answer. They are repeating the exercise this week with the Opportunity, which landed on the opposite side of the planet.

"In a virtual way the students are literally walking across the surface of Mars through the eyes of the rover," Mr. McCollum said. "It's near-real-time exploration of another world, and that's incredible."

Even so, not everyone is content to simply observe. Some hope to contribute to the mission, however remotely. One Mars fan in San Jose, Calif., has colorized hundreds of the raw images from the NASA Web site. Students from Idaho to India have sent local rocks to scientists who will compare them with Mars rocks and post the results on the Internet. Mark Carey, a graphic designer in Toronto, is writing a Web log from the rovers' points of view.

"Don't worry about me," Mr. Carey's blog read on Saturday after scientists said they had figured out why the Spirit went silent. "I am going to get better and start rolling around."

The emotional response that some people had to the Spirit's malfunction may help explain the public's connection to the mission. Humans, psychologists say, tend to see machines that are charged with acting in our stead as close to being alive.

"In a certain sense they become our second selves, our stand-ins," said Sherry Turkle, director of the Initiative on Technology and Self at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Euan Blackman, 31, of Irving, Tex., had become accustomed to checking Mars news on the Web once an hour when the Spirit stopped communicating with its Earth-bound audience. He said he felt as if the rover were an orphaned child.

"My mood was definitely a little down," Mr. Blackman said. "You think of the poor little guy up there sitting by himself, nobody talking to him anymore, and it's not a happy thought."

Critics, however, argue that Mars money should be spent to improve life on Earth. On "The Daily Show" on Comedy Central, the host, Jon Stewart, said that the Spirit was silent because it could not bear to say "this is a rock" one more time.

But for Nate Bloom, 8, who wants to be an astronaut, the posting of pictures from the Opportunity minutes after it landed was a happy return to normalcy. Nate and his parents watched the rover's landing live late on Saturday night at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science.

The event, which drew an overflow crowd of 1,400, among them infants and the elderly, travel agents and engineers, seemed to appeal to a broader audience than the usual space buffs. One woman brought her knitting, pausing to watch the screen when she heard something interesting. People meandered through the museum before and after the landing, eating cookies and drinking hot chocolate as they discussed outer space.

As the Opportunity was settling into its new landscape yesterday, Mr. Caron, the college student, issued his second status report:

"Remarkably smooth, and a very fascinating outcropping of rocks in front of, slightly to the left, of the rover! Chances are that we'll go off in that direction."


NASA Chief Affirms Stand on Canceling Hubble Mission
By WARREN E. LEARY

Published: January 29, 2004

WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 %G—%@ The head of NASA has told a United States senator that he stands by his decision to cancel any space shuttle mission to extend the life of the Hubble Space Telescope.

The official, Sean O'Keefe, the administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, was replying to a request from Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland. He said in a letter to her that his decision to cancel a human service mission to the telescope would stand because he considered the risk too high for astronauts.
Advertisement

Mr. O'Keeffe has canceled a scheduled mission to refurbish the telescope to keep it operating until 2010 or later.

The administrator said his decision was based not on budget considerations, but on concerns that such a shuttle mission placed astronauts at added risk.

Ms. Mikulski, whose state is the home of two major Hubble service institutions, the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, asked Mr. O'Keefe to reconsider. The senator, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that oversees the space agency, also called for it to appoint an independent panel of experts to review the merits of a service mission to the telescope.

In a Jan. 26 letter to Ms. Mikulski, a copy of which was provided to The New York Times, Mr. O'Keefe said he would stand by his decision. He also said he would not appoint a panel to review it.

"In the end, I cannot delegate my ultimate responsibility for decisions related to the safety of human spaceflight to any panel of experts, no matter how distinguished," he wrote.

Ms. Mikulski's office declined to comment on the letter.

Glenn Mahone, a spokesman for the space agency, said Mr. O'Keefe stood by his remarks in the letter but had agreed to meet with the senator to discuss the issue.

When space shuttles, grounded since the Feb. 1 loss of the Columbia and its crew, start flying again, all missions are to be to the International Space Station. To comply with safety recommendations from the board that investigated the Columbia accident, NASA has decided to use the space station for observing shuttles for possible damage and to serve as a haven for crews if an orbiter must be abandoned in an emergency.

In his letter, Mr. O'Keefe restated his contention that a Hubble mission would require new and unique procedures that, taken individually, were surmountable but that in the aggregate were risks significantly higher than a shuttle mission to the space station. The total risk, he said, "I have determined is too high."

Mr. O'Keefe said the telescope should continue to operate until 2007 or 2008, and he challenged its operators to find ways to keep it going until a replacement instrument was launched.


Rovers Are Getting Closer to Making Tracks on Mars
By KENNETH CHANG

Published: January 29, 2004

PASADENA, Calif., Jan. 28 %G—%@ In a few days, NASA's two rovers on Mars may actually be roving.

One rover, the Spirit, disabled by a software glitch last week, could resume its explorations early next week, mission managers said Wednesday at a news conference here at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Advertisement

On Wednesday, the Spirit successfully communicated via its high-speed antenna and sent back a photograph, the first since the malfunction, showing its instrument arm pressed up against the rock nicknamed Adirondack. The rover was in the middle of experiments on Adirondack when the troubles began.

"Everything is right where we left it," said Dr. Mark Adler, a mission manager.

The deployment of the other rover, the Opportunity, which landed early on Sunday Eastern time, continues smoothly. As early as this Sunday, it could start moving from its landing site.

Scientists continue to marvel at the small, shallow crater they see around the Opportunity. For now, the chocolate-brown soil and the outcropping of bedrock about 25 feet away offer far more intriguing questions than answers.

The soil appears to be covered by dark gravel and pebbles. But in places where the rover's air bags bounced during its landing, the surface is a more vivid red and almost completely smooth, the pebbles and gravel seemingly vanished into thin Martian air.

Some science team members like Dr. Matthew Golombek believe that the gravel is still there, just out of sight.

"When the air bags were pressed against them, they actually drove those pebbles into that dust," Dr. Golombek said. "That's my bias."

Dr. James F. Bell III, a professor of astronomy at Cornell and the lead scientist for the panoramic camera, said that some layers of exposed bedrock looked like a conglomerate of similar pebbles and grains and that they might fall loose as the rocks erode.

A second theory is that the pebbles are clods of dust and that the force of the air bag pressing down simply pulverized them.

In several places, the seams of the air bags left sharply defined impressions, like those of a beach ball.

"These marks are telling us something about the physical properties of the material," Dr. Bell said.

The scientists still do not know exactly where the Opportunity is. They know it is in a shallow crater about 20 yards wide, but photographs taken by the spacecraft as it neared the surface showed several craters about that size.

The rim of the crater obscures most of the surrounding landscape, and in spots where the rim is low enough to reveal the horizon beyond, no landmarks are visible.

"You can see in the distance how smooth and flat it is," Dr. Golombek said.

When the Spirit suddenly fell silent on Jan. 21, mission controllers initially feared that a catastrophic failure in its power system, antenna or heating systems might have killed the rover entirely. The problem now appears to be a fixable flaw in the computer programming that controls part of the rover's memory.

That memory, known as flash memory, which handles information after the power is turned off, serves the same role as the hard disk in a personal computer.

"If we're on the right track, we would hope to, at the earliest, be back to doing science early next week," Jennifer Trosper, a mission manager, said.

On Tuesday, NASA named the three hills seen in the distance at the Spirit's landing site after the crew members of Apollo 1 %G—%@ Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White 2nd and Roger B. Chaffee %G—%@ who were killed in a fire that broke out during a test on the launching pad at Cape Canaveral on Jan. 27, 1967.


Rover Engineers Hope They Found Problem
By KENNETH CHANG

Published: January 27, 2004

PASADENA, Calif., Jan 25 %G—%@ NASA engineers managed on Monday to reproduce the type of computer crashes that have befallen the Mars rover Spirit since last week. If the root cause has been found, as engineers hope, the rover may return to complete health and resume its science mission in a week.

The suspected cause will be familiar to any computer user who multitasks too much: too many files were open. A flaw in the rover programs allows the creation of an unlimited number of files, and the computer crashed trying to keep track of them, mission managers said.

"It should only take a couple of days to work around it," a manager, Dr. Mark Adler, said. "I think within, on the order of a week, if we're right, we can possibly get the system back online."

A few hours earlier at a news conference, another manager, Jennifer Trosper, reported progress on identifying the problem, but predicted that it would be two to three weeks before the rover returned to work.

The same flaw affects the Spirit's twin, the rover Opportunity, which landed early on Sunday morning on the opposite side of Mars. Its programming will also be patched.

"Already, the Opportunity guys know there might be a problem with the number of files," Dr. Adler said. "And they're going to make sure they don't get anywhere near that."

The Opportunity has worked flawlessly, and over the next few days it will finish taking a high-resolution 360-degree color panorama of its landing site, a shallow crater 20 yards wide. In the crater are exposed sections of bedrock that the scientists are eager to examine.

"This is like a holy grail for a geologist, to be able to see these incredible rocks that are in their native habitat," said Dr. James F. Bell III, a professor of astronomy at Cornell and the team leader for the panoramic cameras on the rovers.

The Spirit, which arrived three weeks ago, experienced few problems through its initial checks and deployment. On Wednesday, it lost touch as it began to examine its first rock. Mission managers initially worried that they might have lost the rover entirely. But each day since then, the news has improved. The controllers were able to contact the rover and elicit a simple reply beep. The rover sent information showing that its power and heating systems were working properly.

The flight software, however, was still caught in a repeating cycle of crashing and restarting, and the rover, unable to shut down properly at night, was draining its batteries. On a hunch that the problem might be with part of the rover's memory, controllers commanded the Spirit to ignore that part of memory when starting up. The software stopped crashing, and the rover entered a stable, though limited, mode. It also then shut down properly, and the batteries were able to charge.

The troublesome memory is flash memory, similar to the cards that store photographs on digital cameras. Flash memory retains information when power is off, as when the rover shuts down at night. Data from experiments and other necessary information are stored there.

The rover computer also has random access memory, or RAM, the same type found in personal computers. RAM is much faster than flash memory, but forgets without power.

The programming does not limit the files that can be stored in flash memory. The Spirit has "on the order of 10,000 or more, maybe 16,000 files," Dr. Adler said.

Because it is slow to read or write from flash memory, the programming copies often-used information to RAM. But with so many files, the programming ran out of RAM.

On Monday afternoon, engineers finally reproduced the problem. The flight controllers plan to try to download some of the information in the flash memory that should show what the Spirit was trying at the time of the malfunction.

"We still have to get data from the vehicle to verify that what we did in the test bed is what happened on the vehicle," Dr. Adler said.

Even as they worked to confirm their theory, engineers worked on a repair.

"It's not a theory this is a problem on the vehicle, in the sense that we've verified it in the test bed," Dr. Adler said. "So we know, even if this doesn't turn out to be what hit Spirit, it is something we need to work around on both vehicles."


From Glory to Sideshow: The Space Station's Story
By WILLIAM J. BROAD

Published: February 3, 2004

In 1989, when the first President George Bush announced his plan to send American astronauts back to the Moon and on to Mars, he called the proposed space station "our critical next step in all our space endeavors." It would be a base in the weightlessness of space where big rockets would be assembled and blast off on voyages of exploration: "a new bridge between the worlds."
Advertisement

Now, with the outpost hurtling through space 240 miles above Earth and with 16 nations struggling to complete the most challenging engineering project of all time, the station has suddenly become a $100 billion dead end.

The current President Bush made no mention of it as a steppingstone in his speech on Jan. 14 reviving the call for missions to the Moon and Mars. Instead, he spoke of it as a site of biomedical research and an "obligation" that the United States had to help finish.

Mr. Bush gave no clear indication how, or whether, the United States planned to use the station after its prospective completion in 2010. With NASA focusing its efforts and its budget on the Moon and Mars, the station's prospects are uncertain.

"I'm worried that they're going to cut off the space shuttle before we have another vehicle that can fly," said Senator Bill Nelson, a Florida Democrat who is the only current member of Congress to have flown in space. "And that will drastically reduce space station use."

What happened? How did the station go from star to sideshow? Experts cite a litany of factors: cost overruns, design changes, new perceptions of technical risk after the shuttle disasters and shifting national priorities. For instance, orbital changes to accommodate Russia after the cold war made it harder to use the station as a launching pad.

The tale has no real bad guys, the experts say, but many false promises.

"It was always a steppingstone to the stars," said Dr. Howard E. McCurdy, a space historian at American University. "It was sold as all things to all people."

Dr. Alex Roland, a former NASA historian now at Duke University, said a moral of the story was that Congress and the public needed to work harder to hold the space agency accountable for its dreams.

"They keep getting trapped in their own rhetoric," he said. "They're willing victims of it. But as public policy it's a disaster because it feeds unrealistic expectations."

At the start of the space age, visionaries invariably saw outposts in earth orbit as jumping-off points. Dr. Wernher von Braun, in a famous 1952 article, told of a huge inhabited wheel. "From this platform," he said, "a trip to the Moon itself will be just a step."

In 1968, Stanley Kubrick's movie "2001: A Space Odyssey" featured a giant outpost in Earth orbit that was a way station to the Moon and Jupiter.

Finally, after decades of fantasies, President Ronald Reagan proposed in 1984 that the United States actually build a space station. It too was envisioned as a hub for colonies on the Moon and Mars. For Mr. Reagan, the station also represented a way to challenge the Soviet Union. In the cold war, Moscow made human outposts a hallmark of its space activities.

But Congress did not vote construction money to pay for either Mr. Reagan's vision or that of the first President Bush. Not until 1993 did a new a new vision for space take shape, this one emphasizing harmony over rivalry. That September, President Bill Clinton announced that Russia had joined the station effort as a full partner. Its giant rockets were seen as a boon for the project and a good backup if the shuttles should again fail catastrophically, as the Challenger did in 1986.

"One world, one station," said Daniel S. Goldin, NASA's administrator at the time.

There was just one problem. For the Russian rockets to reach the grand unified station, it would need a different orbit.

Shuttles flying out of Florida usually go into an orbit at an angle of 28.5 degrees to the Equator. The original station, meant to be built piecemeal as the shuttles carried up parts, was to have taken shape there.


From Glory to Sideshow: The Space Station's Story

Published: February 3, 2004

(Page 2 of 2)

But Russian rockets blast off in Kazakhstan, much higher on the globe than Florida. They cannot fly much lower than 51.6 degrees latitude without running the risk of dropping spent rocket stages or astronauts during an emergency re-entry on Mongolia or northern China. So the Clinton administration decided to erect the station at 51.6 degrees, hailing it as a "world orbit" accessible to all spacefaring nations.
Advertisement

Orbiting at 51.6 degrees, the new station could no longer act as the perfect jumping-off point for the Moon and beyond, experts said. First, shuttles had to work much harder to get there and could carry less cargo. Second, its inclination was too high for outward-bound ships launched from it to get easily into the plane of the solar system and the planets; to do so would normally require a spaceship to spend much energy.

Valin Thorn, a NASA space station engineer, said that once every 10 days or so the station got into a more favorable alignment with the Moon, but that the outpost's new orbit also shortened the maneuvering window for a rendezvous. "If you launch in the same plane," he said, "getting to the Moon is easier."

In its new life, the station was to be a research post, with it and any offspring captive to the planet.

Dr. Hans Mark, NASA's deputy director in the Reagan administration and a driving force behind the old space station plan, said he took the new plan philosophically.

"It ruled it out," he said of the orbit's effect on the outpost as a staging area. But he made no public criticism, he said, because he judged that "it was politically right" to have Moscow join the project given the new spirit of East-West accord.

Dr. Albert D. Wheelon, a former Central Intelligence Agency official who helped shape the nation's early spy-satellite program, headed the technical panel that advised the Clinton administration on the new orbit. He defended the move as technically and politically sound, adding that the group gave no serious discussion to the lost capability.

"The idea of a jumping-off point never came up," he recalled. "Why? It's crazy. The idea that you're going to use the station as a launching pad, refueling with volatile propellants, after Challenger, was just crazy. It was too dangerous. You'd put the whole station at risk."

In late 1998, a shuttle and a Russian rocket carried aloft the first two elements of the space station, their orbit 51.6 degrees. Ever since, assembly has continued in fits and starts. The grounding of the shuttle fleet after last year's Columbia disaster caused a recent pause, though the Russians, as planned, are still carrying up astronauts and supplies. The space station is now expected to cost $100 billion to build and maintain over its lifetime.

As announced on Jan. 14, the Bush administration's plan to go to the Moon and Mars makes no use of the station other than for intensified research on finding ways to help humans survive extended periods of weightlessness and high radiation that endanger long treks through space.

The Moon, experts say, has now taken on the role of steppingstone. "Lifting heavy spacecraft and fuel out of the Earth's gravity is expensive," Mr. Bush said in his speech. "Spacecraft assembled and provisioned on the Moon could escape its far lower gravity using far less energy, and thus, far less cost."

Many experts are skeptical of those claims, saying Mr. Bush overlooked the large energy costs of getting fuel and rockets to the Moon. Previous NASA studies for Mars missions have seldom if ever used the Moon as a launching pad because that would take about twice as much energy as going from the Earth or an Earth outpost.

"The president and some of his advisers appear not to be aware of the implications," said Saunders B. Kramer, a veteran aerospace engineer. "It's worse than a pipe dream. It's nonsense."

Dr. Roland of Duke said the Moon base had the same kind of inflated rhetoric that accompanied the station's debut and could suffer a similar fate.

"One definition of a fanatic is redoubling your effort after losing sight of your objective," he said. "That's NASA's problem. It needs to get back to basics."


Intriguing Intricacies From the Rocks of Mars
By KENNETH CHANG

Published: February 3, 2004

Gusev Crater and Meridiani Planum, the exploration sites for NASA's twin rovers Spirit and Opportunity, are on opposite sides of Mars and are as different as New York City and the Illinois prairie. Gusev Crater is rocks, rocks everywhere. Meridiani Planum is flat, almost featureless, almost rockless and blanketed with a fine-grained red soil and dark pebbles.

Mission scientists yesterday presented the 360-degree color panorama of the Opportunity landing site in Meridiani Planum. Because the panoramic camera actually consists of two cameras, it produces three-dimensional images. The camera also has 14 color filters, so it can view a scene from the infrared to the blue.

"It provides us with a real sense of `You Are There' at the site," said Dr. Jeffrey R. Johnson, a member of the science team from the United States Geological Survey in Flagstaff, Ariz.

Before the rovers landed, many scientists expected that the Spirit would land on more interesting terrain in Gusev Crater and that the Opportunity would have to drive quite a distance to find worthy objects of study.

"It's just the opposite," said Dr. Ronald Greeley, a professor of geological sciences at Arizona State University who is on the science team.

That reaction may seem odd for a mission trying to unravel the geological history of Mars, specifically whether it was once warm and wet.

Gusev Crater may be an ancient lakebed. With river channels visible at its perimeter, water almost certainly flowed into the 95-mile-wide depression, at least intermittently, and the water would have carried rocks from surrounding regions.

The fun at Gusev, geologists say, will be the chance to examine a wide variety of rocks from many places.

"We see rocks there, but we don't really know where they came from," said Dr. Steven W. Squyres, a professor of astronomy at Cornell who is the mission's principal investigator. "Many were probably carried there by water or lava that flowed up. It's going to be a tough puzzle to sort out."

But Gusev, it turns out, looks like terrain at the two Viking lander sites in the 1970's and what the Mars Pathfinder encountered in 1997.

Scientists hope to head off soon to a more interesting site, a crater 800 feet away, where they hope that the depression discloses more of the geological history below the surface.

The landing site on Meridiani Planum, by comparison, looked so bland and boring from orbit that mission scientists briefly considered asking that the target be nudged to an area with a few more craters.

Now that the Opportunity has landed, scientists are wondering how long they can linger near the landing site. The surreal surroundings look like nothing else. The soil is considerably darker than the other landing sites.

"I always knew if we went to enough places on Mars we would find something that's truly different," Dr. Squyres said at a news conference after the landing.

By luck, the Opportunity overshot its target, ending in a shallow 72-foot-wide crater. The scientists gasped when the first photographs showed an outcrop of bedrock 25 feet away, the first piece of Martian bedrock they will be able to explore closely.

The bedrock contains fine layers, as thin as half an inch, indicating that it is sedimentary or layers of volcanic ash from eruptions.

"The beauty of bedrock is you know this is the home neighborhood of these rocks," Dr. Squyres said. "That's just a tremendously valuable thing. Instead of being busted up into pieces, you've actually got these layers."

Dr. Squyres said the layers are too thin to be lava flows.

An instrument that measures thermal emissions has identified in the dark pebbly surface an iron oxide that on Earth typically forms in the presence of water. The oxide probably gives the surface its dark color.

Even the dirt fascinates scientists. The panoramas show round bright circles where the air bags that cushioned the landing bounced. The soil even shows the imprints of the seams of the air bags.

"Hopefully," Dr. Johnson said, "over the next few weeks as the rover starts to do its reconnaissance of the outcrop and sample some of the soils, we'll have a better idea of just the type of the geological history we're looking at."


Rover Offers More Evidence That Water Existed on Mars
By KENNETH CHANG

Published: February 1, 2004

PASADENA, Calif., Jan. 31 %G—%@ The rover Opportunity took its first roll on Martian soil early on Saturday morning, and scientists offered the most tantalizing evidence so far that the landing site once lay in liquid water.

While ice still exists near the poles, most of Mars, including the equatorial region where the Opportunity set down last week, is devoid of water, liquid or frozen. But some scientists believe Mars was warm and wet early in its history and may have possessed an environment where life could have arisen. The $820 million mission of the Opportunity and its twin, the Spirit, is to look for geological signs of liquid water in Mars' distant past.
Advertisement

At a news conference on Saturday at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory here, Dr. Philip Christensen, a professor of geological sciences at Arizona State University, confirmed that an instrument on the Opportunity had detected the iron oxide hematite in the dark pebbles and gravel that dot the landing site.

Furthermore, Dr. Christensen, the lead scientist for the instrument, said, "I think the preliminary evidence is consistent with hematite forming at low temperatures in chemical reactions with water."

The instrument, known as the mini-thermal emission spectrometer, looks at infrared light radiated from the rocks and soils. Certain minerals including hematite emit a distinctive mix of infrared light.

One team member, Dr. Wendy M. Calvin, said Friday morning that hematite had been discovered at the Opportunity landing site, but the leaders of the science mission did not confirm it, saying more checking was required. Dr. Christensen said his team finished its analysis on Friday afternoon.

Hematite that forms at low temperatures from sediments at the bottom of a lake or sea has a noticeably different infrared signature than hematite that forms out of hot lava without water. Dr. Christensen said that the infrared data argued against the hot lava explanation.

Hematite is what drew scientists to this location, Meridiani Planum, flat plains near the equator. From orbit, the Mars Odyssey spacecraft spotted a deposit of hematite the size of Oklahoma blanketing Meridiani Planum, but it could not tell whether the hematite was in the soil or the rocks or elsewhere. The Opportunity was sent to investigate, and researchers hope to learn not only where exactly the hematite is, but also its origin.

Already, the infrared instrument has provided some clues.

While the pebbles and gravel contain hematite, the fine reddish soil below does not. The exposed, light-colored bedrock 20 feet from the Opportunity is also hematite free. Dr. Christensen said the pebbles must have come from a rock layer, not yet seen, above the light-colored bedrock that had eroded away into pebbles. "It's got to be there somewhere, and if we're lucky, we'll find it," Dr. Christensen said.

Scientists will soon have a better look.

At 4:50 a.m. Saturday, the Opportunity made its first drive, methodically rolling 10 feet off the front of its lander, its six wheels then digging into the dirt. It will sit there for the next few days, conducting experiments on the soil beneath it, before moving on to the bedrock.

At present, the scientists have no idea what the bedrock is made of. "All I can say at the moment is what it's not," Dr. Christensen said. The instrument readings showed no hematite, no quartz, no carbonates.

A suite of instruments that the Opportunity will press against the rocks should tell more about the minerals there. For instance, if scientists find goethite %G—%@ essentially hematite with trapped water %G—%@ that would strengthen the argument for past water.

For the trip to Mars, the Opportunity was folded up to fit within a triangular pyramid. After the landing last Sunday, the pyramid opened like flower petals, forming a platform, and over the next week, controllers extended the Opportunity's wheels, turned on instruments and tested equipment. The testing and deployment went so smoothly that mission managers decided to begin driving early, on Saturday, the Opportunity's seventh day on Mars.

"I think we're getting kind of good at this," said Joel Krajewski, chief engineer in charge of the rovers' initial preparations on the Martian surface.


Rover Offers More Evidence That Water Existed on Mars

Published: February 1, 2004

(Page 2 of 2)

By contrast, Spirit, which landed on the opposite side of Mars three weeks before the Opportunity, did not start its drive until its 12th day. With Spirit, air bags used to cushion the landing blocked the forward exit ramp %G—%@ a piece of reinforced fabric %G—%@ so controllers swiveled it by 120 degrees to drive off a different ramp. The Opportunity has no such obstacles.
Advertisement

"This is a cake walk by comparison," said Kevin Burke, the lead mechanical engineer for handling the lander exits. "Realistically, it's pretty benign."

On Friday, engineers rehearsed the roll-off at a test laboratory at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which is running the rover missions.

To ease the exit, controllers had pushed down the back "petal" of the Opportunity's landing platform, pitching the rover forward at an angle of 12 degrees. In the test, the engineers put full-scale mock-ups of the rover and lander in a similar pose, like a swimmer about to jump off a diving board.

The mock-up rover moved off the mock-up lander without incident %G—%@ in the 536th and final rolloff test in the last year %G—%@ to a round of applause from onlookers.

Morning of the seventh Martian day for the real Opportunity began at 11:05 p.m. Friday, accompanied in the control room by the playing of Bruce Springsteen's "Born to Run." Four hours later, at 3:26 a.m. Saturday, with the sun close to noon over Meridiani Planum, Mr. Burke issued the commands for the Opportunity to move. Eleven minutes and 128 million miles later, the message reached the Opportunity. At 4:50 a.m., the rover started moving and traversed 10 feet in 83 seconds, veering slightly to the right. A few minutes later, controllers received the beep from the Opportunity that it had received and performed the commands.

"The vehicle should be already on the surface at this time," said Jim Erickson, the mission manager. In the control room, another song: "Going Mobile" from the Who.

Finally, at 6:02 a.m. came the final confirmation: a photograph from the Opportunity. "Two for two," said Chris Lewicki, the flight director, referring to the successful deployments of the Spirit and Opportunity. "One dozen wheels on soil."


