White House Shows Less Certainty Now on Iraq's Arms
By JAMES RISEN

Published: January 27, 2004

WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 %G—%@ The White House began to back away on Monday from its assertions that Iraq had illegal weapons, saying it now wanted to compare prewar intelligence assessments with what may be actually found there.

The evolving position followed criticism of the intelligence reports about Iraq from the C.I.A.'s former chief weapons inspector, David A. Kay, comments that increased pressure on the C.I.A. and intensified the political debate in Washington over who was responsible for shaping the prewar intelligence that President Bush used to justify toppling Saddam Hussein.

While Republican leaders have focused on the C.I.A. and how it gathered intelligence, Democrats have called for a close look at how the White House used that information.
Advertisement

On Monday White House officials were no longer asserting that stockpiles of banned weapons would eventually be found.

Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, told reporters en route to an appearance by President Bush in Little Rock, Ark., that the administration would wait for the weapons search team, the Iraq Survey Group, to complete its work before drawing any conclusions about the quality of the intelligence available.

But he said that whatever the group's conclusions, Mr. Bush had done the correct thing in deposing Mr. Hussein because Iraq was clearly working on chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.

"We know he had the intention, we know he had the capability," Mr. McClellan said. "And, given his history and given the events of Sept. 11, we could not afford to rely on the good intentions of Saddam Hussein."

Dr. Kay, who resigned Friday, said that there was scant evidence that Mr. Hussein kept stockpiles of illicit weapons, and that the C.I.A., under its director, George J. Tenet, and other intelligence agencies were wrong in their assessments.

Dr. Kay has avoided placing any political spin on the flaws in the intelligence. But his comments, coming during a presidential campaign and as Congressional panels draw up reviews of prewar intelligence, had immediate political impact.

On Capitol Hill, Democratic leaders used Dr. Kay's statements to argue for a more aggressive investigation by the Republican-controlled Congress into the shaping of prewar intelligence. The Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, complained that the Republican leader of the Senate intelligence committee, Pat Roberts of Kansas, was seeking to limit the scope of that panel's inquiry, even as Dr. Kay was disclosing the extent of the problem.

"Unfortunately, it appears neither the administration nor the chairman of the Senate intelligence committee shares this view" of the need for a vigorous investigation, Senator Daschle said.

Mr. McClellan, pressed on whether the White House still believed that stockpiles of illicit weapons would be found in Iraq %G—%@ an assertion White House officials made as recently as Friday %G—%@ replied, "I think it was the judgment of intelligence agencies around the world, as well as the United Nations Special Commission on Iraq, that there were large, unaccounted-for stockpiles." The special commission was the United Nations inspection team.

Caught in the middle is Mr. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, who is both a Bush confidant and a strong defender of the agency.

The Senate intelligence panel has drafted a report strongly critical of the C.I.A.'s handling of prewar intelligence, and is waiting for Mr. Tenet's testimony, among other things, before completing its work. He is scheduled to appear on March 4, for the first time since the committee began its inquiry last spring, a Congressional official said.

Administration officials said a draft of Mr. Tenet's written testimony was being circulated for review within the government, and is expected to be discussed later this week by President Bush's advisers.

Congressional officials said the written testimony was not due until 72 hours before he appears before the panel, but they said they understood that the administration was seeking to deliver the document within the next 10 days in order to influence the final report.

Dr. Kay said in an interview over the weekend that he did not believe that C.I.A. analysts were pressed by the Bush administration to exaggerate the threat posed by Iraq's weapons programs. He also stressed that everyone in the intelligence community, as well as outside experts here and abroad, all thought Iraq had illegal weapons.


White House Shows Less Certainty Now on Iraq's Arms

Published: January 27, 2004

(Page 2 of 2)

He said American intelligence analysts had believed that Iraq had illegal weapons during the Clinton and Bush administrations, and said the fact the intelligence community as a whole was so wrong meant there should be a thorough reappraisal of how such intelligence work is done.

On Monday, Dr. Kay's comments prompted members of both parties to argue that it is time for the Central Intelligence Agency to acknowledge it had made serious mistakes in its prewar assessments.
Advertisement

Until now, both in public and in private discussions with the committee staff members, senior intelligence officials have refused to acknowledge that any mistakes were made, the Congressional officials said. But the officials, both Democrats and Republicans, said they believed that Dr. Kay's candid remarks should prompt Mr. Tenet to provide Congress his best explanation.

"The conclusions reached by the intelligence community weren't substantiated by the intelligence," said one Congressional official, outlining a finding that is expected to be spelled out in a draft report being prepared for members of the committee. "The question is why these conclusions were allowed to permeate the analysis."

Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the panel, said over the weekend that Dr. Kay's public statements raised "truly alarming questions about our intelligence, the reasons and justification for going to war and the president's doctrine of pre-emption."

The House intelligence committee is preparing its own report on the administration's handling of prewar intelligence. That panel's top Democrat, Representative Jane Harman of California, said over the weekend that the administration had been "in deep denial" by failing to acknowledge what she called "serious deficiencies in prewar intelligence on Iraq" and by having "no apparent commitment to addressing them."

"The potential threat posed by Iraq's stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons and Iraq's nuclear weapons program was central to the case for war," she said. "In light of Dr. Kay's statement, the president owes the American public and the world an explanation."

Douglas Jehl contributed reporting from London for this article.Citing Free Speech, Judge Voids Part of Antiterror Act
By ERIC LICHTBLAU

Published: January 27, 2004

WASHINGTON, Jan. 26 %G—%@ For the first time, a federal judge has struck down part of the sweeping antiterrorism law known as the USA Patriot Act, joining other courts that have challenged integral parts of the Bush administration's campaign against terrorism.

In Los Angeles, the judge, Audrey B. Collins of Federal District Court, said in a decision made public on Monday that a provision in the law banning certain types of support for terrorist groups was so vague that it risked running afoul of the First Amendment.

Civil liberties advocates hailed the decision as an important victory in efforts to rein in what they regard as legal abuses in the government's antiterrorism initiatives. The Justice Department defended the law as a crucial tool in the fight against terrorists and promised to review the Los Angeles ruling.

At issue was a provision in the act, passed by Congress after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, that expanded previous antiterrorism law to prohibit anyone from providing "expert advice or assistance" to known terrorist groups. The measure was part of a broader set of prohibitions that the administration has relied heavily on in prosecuting people in Lackawanna, N.Y., Portland, Ore., Detroit and elsewhere accused of providing money, training, Internet services and other "material support" to terrorist groups.

In Los Angeles, several humanitarian groups that work with Kurdish refugees in Turkey and Tamil residents of Sri Lanka had sued the government, arguing in a lawsuit that the antiterrorism act was so ill defined that they had stopped writing political material and helping organize peace conferences for fear that they would be prosecuted.

Judge Collins agreed that the ban on providing advice and assistance to terrorists was "impermissibly vague" and blocked the Justice Department from enforcing it against the plaintiffs.

"The USA Patriot Act places no limitation on the type of expert advice and assistance which is prohibited, and instead bans the provision of all expert advice and assistance regardless of its nature," Judge Collins wrote in a ruling issued late Friday.

As a result, the law could be construed to include "unequivocally pure speech and advocacy protected by the First Amendment," wrote the judge, who was appointed to the bench by President Bill Clinton.

At the same time, however, Judge Collins sided with the government in rejecting some of the plaintiffs' arguments, and she declined to grant a nationwide injunction against the Justice Department.

Even so, lawyers for the humanitarian groups said they were heartened by the ruling. It came seven weeks after many of the same plaintiffs won a ruling in a separate but related case before a federal appeals court in San Francisco. That court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, found that a 1996 antiterrorism law prohibiting anyone from providing training or personnel for terrorist groups was too vague to pass constitutional muster. In recent months, other courts have also challenged the administration's designation of enemy combatants and other aspects of the campaign against terrorism, but the Los Angeles decision was the first by a federal judge to strike down any portion of the Patriot Act.

"The critical thing here is that this is the first demonstration that courts will not allow Congress in the name of fighting terrorism to ignore our constitutional rights," said Nancy Chang, a senior lawyer with the Center for Constitutional Rights, the New York-based organization that brought the lawsuit against the Justice Department on behalf of the humanitarian groups. "By using a broad and vague definition of terrorism, that has a chilling effect on free speech."

The Justice Department, which already sought a review of the related decision in San Francisco, also plans to review Judge Collins's ruling to decide whether it should be appealed, officials said.

Administration officials have made clear that they consider the Patriot Act to be an integral part of their efforts to identify, track and disrupt terrorist activities.

Indeed, President Bush in his State of the Union message last week urged Congress to renew parts of the act that are scheduled to expire in 2005. But the administration may face a tough sell in Congress, with a growing number of lawmakers from both parties questioning whether the government's expanded powers in dozens of areas of law enforcement have infringed on civil liberties. In largely symbolic votes, more than 230 communities nationwide have raised formal objections to the law.

Mark Corallo, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said in a statement on Monday that the language banning expert advice or assistance to terrorists represented only "a modest enhancement" of previous law.

"By targeting those who provide material support by providing expert advice or assistance," Mr. Corallo said, "the law made clear that Americans are threatened as much by the person who teaches a terrorist to build a bomb as by the one who pushes the button."


In Shake-Up, Dean Names Gore Ally to Run Campaign
By JODI WILGOREN and GLEN JUSTICE

Published: January 29, 2004


Getty Images
Joe Trippi left Howard Dean's campaign headquarters in Vermont on Wednesday.

ARTICLE TOOLS
Email This Article E-Mail This Article
Printer Friendly Format Printer-Friendly Format
Most E-mailed Articles Most E-Mailed Articles
Reprints & Permissions Reprints & Permissions
Single Page Format Single-Page Format




MULTIMEDIA

Page One: Thursday, Jan. 29, 2004
Video: Page One: Thursday, Jan. 29, 2004

...........

RELATED

. Turnover: New Man at Top Is Something of an Old Hand (January 29, 2004)

. Political Flood Starts to Wash Across Missouri (January 29, 2004)

. Safest Prediction for the Outcome in North Dakota's Primary Is 'Cold' (January 29, 2004)

. The Voters: Kerry Support Found Across Wide Range of Democrats (January 29, 2004)

..........

READERS' OPINIONS

. Forum: Join a Discussion on The 2004 Presidential Election

TIMES NEWS TRACKER

  Topics
Alerts
Dean, Howard


Presidential Elections (US)


Trippi, Joe


Neel, Roy



Enlarge This Image

Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
Howard Dean prepared Wednesday in Burlington, Vt., to tape 26 interviews for stations in 12 states that vote in the next few weeks.

BURLINGTON, Vt., Jan. 28 %G—%@ After spending nearly $40 million only to face devastating defeats in Iowa and New Hampshire, Howard Dean named a longtime friend of former Vice President Al Gore as his campaign chief on Wednesday, prompting the abrupt resignation of his campaign manager, Joe Trippi.

Dr. Dean said he had tapped Roy Neel, who was given the title of chief executive officer, to streamline day-to-day decision making as the Democratic presidential contest enters a lightning round of multistate contests. He said he had hoped to keep Mr. Trippi on as senior strategist.

But after a year of building the Dean juggernaut, from a staff of seven to what he has often called "the greatest grass-roots movement in the history of American politics," Mr. Trippi refused to be sidelined, and walked out after what aides described as an emotional staff meeting here.

"You're going to see a leaner, meaner organization," Dr. Dean, who has asked his 500 staff members to skip their paychecks for two weeks, told reporters on an 8 p.m. conference call. "We had really geared up for what we thought was going to be a front runner's campaign. It's not going to be a front-runner's campaign. It's going to be a long war of attrition. What we need is decision making that's centralized."

The selection of Mr. Neel, a former telecommunications lobbyist who was an aide to Mr. Gore for nearly 20 years, on Capitol Hill and in the Clinton White House, is a stark shift for an insurgent campaign powered largely by political neophytes whose main message is overthrowing the establishment. He is the ultimate Washington insider, not unlike like those Dr. Dean derides daily.

But campaign officials say Mr. Neel was hired to bring order and professionalism to the decentralized %G—%@ often woefully disorganized %G—%@ troops that Mr. Trippi led more by inspiration than instruction.

The shake-up comes at a perilous time for the Dean campaign. Only weeks ago, he was riding high in the polls and had amassed far more money than any other campaign. But this week, campaign fund-raisers said, the operation had only $4.5 million to $5 million on hand, about the amount it raised over the Internet since Jan. 1, and was scrambling to collect more money.

After raising $41 million in 2003, far more than any of his Democratic rivals, Dr. Dean spent so much on television and on the ground in Iowa and New Hampshire that campaign officials said they were only confident of having enough money to compete through next week.

The campaign has upended its advertising strategy. Dr. Dean, who last June was the first candidate to advertise, is now the only major candidate to be off the air right now, and his strategists said Wednesday night that they were in no hurry to return. They confirmed last weekend that they had gone dark in every state but New Hampshire so they could reassess Dr. Dean's electoral chances and then flood advertising in those states they believed he could win.

Some of Dr. Dean's prominent supporters had, indeed, complained about the effectiveness of Dr. Dean's advertising campaign, which was bigger and more expensive than those of his competitors.

Figures from a rival campaign, confirmed by the independent Campaign Media Analysis Group, which tracks advertising spending, show that Dr. Dean has spent roughly $9.2 million in advertising since June, more than $2 million above the next highest advertiser, Senator John Kerry, who spent $6.9 million, the figures show. Nearly $6 million of Dr. Dean's campaign money went to advertisements in Iowa and New Hampshire, where Dr. Dean finished third and second, respectively.

But senior Dean officials said the advertisements had greatly helped to build his popularity in the summer and fall, popularity that was slowly chipped away by attacks from rivals and with intensive scrutiny from the news media. "When you're winning, the ads are always great," said Steve McMahon, Dr. Dean's media adviser and a partner in Mr. Trippi's media firm. "When you're not, they're never quite good enough."

Some of the fund-raisers insisted that they were not giving up, and said the campaign had raised about $1.8 million since the Iowa caucuses and had continued to raise as much as $200,000 a day over the Internet.

The replacement of Mr. Trippi comes at a critical juncture for Dr. Dean, who spent most of last year as the dominant figure in the crowded Democratic field, but now faces an uncertain future. While his rivals spun out to the seven states with critical elections on Tuesday, Dr. Dean spent the day at his headquarters here, arguing with aides on whether to make an aggressive, targeted bid for a victory in certain states or try to continue campaigning coast to coast.



In Shake-Up, Dean Names Gore Ally to Run Campaign

Published: January 29, 2004

(Page 2 of 2)

The only campaigning he did was taping 26 satellite interviews for stations in 12 states that vote in the next few weeks. While most people in politics, including many in his own camp, believe he must win a state on Feb. 3 %G—%@ or Feb. 7 at the very latest %G—%@ Dr. Dean said repeatedly Wednesday that he did not need to post a victory, only to keep amassing enough delegates to be the last man standing, or to stage a challenge at the party's convention this summer.
Advertisement

"I think we're good right through Super Tuesday," he said Wednesday morning on National Public Radio.

Steve Grossman, the campaign's chairman, said, "Sometimes in politics as well as in business you need a defeat, you need a shock to the system to bring you up short and to confront with some humility your weaknesses and your problems."

Mr. Trippi, described by friends as furious with Dr. Dean, spent the evening dining with staff members, before the 14-hour drive back to his Maryland farm on Thursday.

"I'm sorry I disappointed, in any way, the governor, but what upsets me the most is if anything I did let down the hundreds of thousands of people who support us," he said in a brief interview. He added that he had tried "as hard as I could %G—%@ that's all you can do in this business."

"The most important thing is to change this country's politics," he said. "I think Howard Dean is the one person who can do that."

Tricia Enright, the campaign's communications director, said Dr. Dean was forming "a new creative team" to overhaul its television advertisements. She said the campaign was not firing its media firm, in which Mr. Trippi is a partner. Many Dean supporters have been critical of the ad campaign, particularly in Iowa. Some questioned the arrangements by which Mr. Trippi forfeited a salary as a campaign manager but collected commissions %G—%@ said to be as high as 15 percent in some cases %G—%@ based on advertising buys.

It was Mr. Trippi who revolutionized the use of the Internet in fund-raising and political organizing. Mr. Trippi was the reason hundreds of volunteers and interns fled their homes to move to Burlington or Des Moines or Manchester and join the campaign. He was the critical player in securing endorsements of three major unions.

It was also Mr. Trippi who suggested that Dr. Dean give a rousing, fired-up speech after his crushing third-place finish in Iowa, a speech %G—%@ and screech %G—%@ that may have led to his undoing in New Hampshire.

Some of the major unions and Washington politicians whose endorsements helped solidify Dr. Dean's front-runner status have grown jittery in recent weeks as they watched a campaign seemingly off the tracks. Since his third-place finish in Iowa, Dr. Dean has been flooded with advice from all corners, and spent much of the week huddled with two long-serving aides from Vermont, exacerbating a standing feud between them and Mr. Trippi.

Those aides, Kate O'Connor, who travels with Dr. Dean, and Bob Rogan, a deputy campaign manager, did not return telephone calls. But some of Dr. Dean's key supporters openly spoke in interviews about the urgency of changing course.

"We have not won the elections we hoped and kind of expected and needed to make some changes," said Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat who is a friend of Mr. Trippi.

But if such a dramatic move was necessary to signal understanding that something has gone awry, losing Mr. Trippi %G—%@ who may be followed by several top loyal aides %G—%@ is risky, since he has become a sort of cult hero to the legions of Deaniacs at the core of the movement.

Jodi Wilgoren reported from Burlington for this article and Glen Justice from Manchester, N.H. Jim Rutenberg and Michael Janofsky also contributed reporting for this article.



Democrats Assail, and Tap, 'Special Interests'
By GLEN JUSTICE and JOHN TIERNEY

Published: January 31, 2004

CHARLESTON, S.C., Jan. 30 %G—%@ The Democratic presidential hopefuls have been crossing the country this week promising to drive "special interests" and "influence peddlers" out of the White House.

But campaign finance reports show some contenders benefit significantly from the lobbyists and special interests that they attack.
Advertisement

While Senator John Kerry regularly promises to stand up to "big corporations," his campaign has taken money from executives on Wall Street and those representing the telecommunications industry, which is under his purview in Congress. Mr. Kerry denounces President Bush for catering to the rich, but he has depended more heavily on affluent donors than the other leading Democrats except for another populist, Senator John Edwards. Mr. Kerry's spokeswoman, Stephanie Cutter, said the contributions had no effect on his votes.

"Anybody who thought they were buying influence with John Kerry can look at his votes and know they're not getting their money's worth," Ms. Cutter said.

Mr. Edwards tells audiences, "I've never taken a dime from a Washington lobbyist and I never will." That might be literally true %G—%@ not many lobbyists give dimes these days %G—%@ but Mr. Edwards has accepted at least a few contributions from current and former lobbyists, and his campaign manager was a registered Washington lobbyist in 2002. Mr. Edwards has also accepted millions of dollars from lawyers, including members of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America, a trade group that wields enormous influence on tort reform. An ex-president of the group, Fred Baron, is a financial co-chairman for Mr. Edwards's campaign. The new president of the group and all four executive officers, have each given $2,000.

Mr. Edwards's spokeswoman, Jennifer Palmieri, said that the campaign's policy was not to take money from anyone registered at the time as a Washington lobbyist, but that it had taken money from people who formerly or subsequently worked as lobbyists. Ms. Palmieri also pointed to Mr. Edwards's proposals to limit lobbyists' gifts and activities. "John Edwards supports the strongest proposal on the table for campaign-finance reform," she said.

To be sure, none of the Democrats have collected donations on the scale of President Bush's campaign, and they generally avoid donations from political action committees. But the Democrats are hardly naifs when it comes to enlisting support from special interests in Washington and elsewhere, from corporate leaders and from unions in the public and private sectors.

"Special interests are the Darth Vader of contemporary politics," Darrell West, a professor of political science at Brown University, said. "Everybody loves to hate them. But politicians can't live without them, because they need money to get their message out. It's very much a love-hate relationship."

According to studies by campaign finance watchdog groups, Howard Dean and Gen. Wesley K. Clark on affluent donors are less dependent than Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, but they also collect money from corporate executives and rely for guidance on the Washington insiders they criticize.

General Clark, who had been lobbying for the Acxiom Corporation of Little Rock, Ark., on domestic security, was a registered lobbyist himself when he began his quest for the presidency. When Roy Neel was put in charge of Dr. Dean's campaign on Wednesday, he was not the first lobbyist to work on behalf of the campaign.

In his victory speech on Tuesday night in New Hampshire, Mr. Kerry sounded a familiar theme when he declared, "I have a message for the influence peddlers, for the polluters, the H.M.O.'s, the big drug companies that get in the way, the big oil and the special interests who now call the White House their home. `We're coming, you're going, and don't let the door hit you on the way out!' "

Mr. Kerry is an experienced fund-raiser, having worked to raise money while on the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and for his own campaigns. In his campaign for the nomination, he has collected more than $1 million from employees of securities and investment businesses. He took in $70,000 from employees of Citigroup and $62,500 from workers at Goldman Sachs, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan group that tracks campaign finance trends.

Mr. Kerry's top career donor is the law firm Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky & Popeo, according to a study by Chuck Lewis, executive director of another campaign-finance group, the Center for Public Integrity. Mr. Kerry received $231,000 over the course of his career from lawyers in the firm, where his brother, Cameron F. Kerry, is a telecommunications lawyer.


Democrats Assail, and Tap, 'Special Interests'

Published: January 31, 2004

(Page 2 of 2)

The firm has represented clients like the Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association and AT&T Wireless Services, whose industry falls under the jurisdiction of a Senate subcommittee that includes Mr. Kerry, the report said.

"You can't raise millions of dollars for politics without being entangled with lobbyists and special interests," Mr. Lewis said.

Mr. Kerry has criticized the current "creed of greed" and faulted Mr. Bush letting "the privileged ride high and reap the rewards." But his typical donors share at least one similarity with the president's, an ability to give $2,000, the legal maximum.

Fifty-five percent of Mr. Kerry's money has come from donors giving $2,000. For Mr. Bush, the comparable figure is 73 percent, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

The center's analysis shows that small donors, those giving $200 or less, have provided 12 percent of Mr. Kerry's campaign money, the same percentage they provided for Mr. Bush.

Mr. Edwards collected even less, 3 percent, of his campaign money from contributions of $200 or less, the analysis showed. In his stump speech about "the two Americas," Mr. Edwards promises to protect ordinary citizens against the wealthy and the powerful. But 65 percent of the money in his campaign has come from Americans who are able to donate $2,000 or more, chiefly lawyers, according to the research group.

Mr. Edwards, a former trial lawyer, received $7.5 million from members of the legal profession through September 2003, the analysis by the Center for Responsive Politics shows. That was half the money he had raised to that point.

Mr. Edwards routinely inveighs against the influence of lobbyists and the exploitation of consumers by big corporations, predatory lenders and hidden fees of credit-card companies. But his own campaign is managed by Nick Baldick, who has worked for concerns that have lobbied on behalf of AT&T, Mastercard International and Visa USA.

Mr. Baldick was a registered lobbyist as late as 2002, but is no longer, lobbying records show.

Ms. Palmieri, spokeswoman for Mr. Edwards, said Mr. Baldick had not done any lobbying personally while at the firm and had been erroneously registered as a lobbyist by his partner. She also said the campaign returned any contribution that it learned was from a currently registered lobbyist. One lobbyist independently confirmed in an interview that his contribution had been returned after the campaign realized his occupation.

But the policy allowed the campaign to accept contributions from Washington insiders like John Podesta, a prominent aide to President Bill Clinton who went on to work as a lobbyist. He was out of the business last year, when he made a $500 donation to Mr. Edwards's campaign. But today he is once again a registered lobbyist.

"This was not the plank in his platform that caused me to give him money," Mr. Podesta said of Mr. Edwards's policy. "In my mind, this is a gimmick. But it's a gimmick that points out something important, the flow of special interest to the Bush campaign and the special favors they receive. Edwards has found a gimmick to highlight that."


Bush Bets America Agrees With His Fiscal Priorities
By ELISABETH BUMILLER

Published: February 3, 2004

WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 %G—%@ Presidents like to keep their budgets tight in their first years in office, then loosen up with an array of splashy new domestic programs during re-election campaigns.

But President Bush turned that tactic upside down, and on Monday unveiled a budget with cuts in domestic programs but big increases for the military, showing himself a gambler willing to bet his re-election that he made the correct fiscal choices.

Mr. Bush's calculation is that voters will care far more about protecting the nation from another terrorist attack than about cuts to popular programs, or, for that matter, the record-high deficit.

To that end, Mr. Bush's $2.4 trillion budget provides the back-up material to the re-election theme that the president first set forth in his State of the Union address: He is the national security candidate to take care of America's fears.

The strategy, Republicans said, is also designed to give Mr. Bush some political cover from a projected deficit of more than $500 billion.

"It's clear that defense and homeland security are two areas where he can spend a lot more money and be insulated from criticism," said Walter Russell Mead, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations and the author of the forthcoming "Power, Terror, Peace and War: America's Grand Strategy in a World at Risk." "I don't think you're going to hear a lot from the Democrats that he's increasing defense spending too much. People are not going to turn around and say you did too much on national defense. The big danger is that you didn't do enough."

A former Bush administration official involved in economic policy put it this way: "Five, 10, 15, 20 years from now, when people look back at the Bush administration, there's only one thing they're going to care about %G—%@ it's the war. Did you prosecute the war, did you make America safer? Everything else is irrelevant. If you have to blow a gasket in the budget, then they're going to do it. Ronald Reagan had big deficits and they eventually went away. It's the end of the cold war that people remember."

But even Republicans said there were huge downsides to Mr. Bush's strategy, which they acknowledge effectively prohibits the president from announcing major new initiatives in an election year. Like his State of the Union address, Mr. Bush's budget calls for no big new domestic programs and in fact forces him to cut so deeply that even his Republican allies in Congress called it politically impractical and said restorations were inevitable.

"It's going to be a heavy lift," said Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma, the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee.

At the same time, Mr. Bush was faced with an embarrassing deficit that for the first time in 50 years a Republican president could not blame on Congress, since members of Mr. Bush's party control both the House and the Senate. Although voters do not seem to have seized on the issue yet, Democrats are increasingly using the deficit as a symbol of what they say are Mr. Bush's disastrous economic policies.

"We're on a course that takes us toward the fiscal cliff," said Senator Kent Conrad of North Dakota, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Budget Committee. "This course cannot be sustained."

A focus of Mr. Bush's budget %G—%@ and his re-election campaign %G—%@ is his promise to halve the deficit in five years, a pledge intended to show he has not lost touch with fiscal reality. But members of both parties expressed deep skepticism that Mr. Bush would be able to make good on that pledge because, they said, he had spent so freely in the past, and had so often underestimated fiscal bad news.

"If you show no inclination to walk the walk as well as talk the talk, then people are just not going to believe you," said Bruce Bartlett, a conservative economist who worked in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and the first President Bush. "I don't think you'll find anybody in any party who takes seriously the administration's promise to hold down spending. The president has never made small government a major element of his philosophy."

Senator Jon Corzine, a New Jersey Democrat and former chairman of the Goldman Sachs investment banking firm, was even more pointed.

"Asserting that we're going to cut this in half by 2008 is right in there with Richard Nixon saying `I've got a secret plan to end the war,' " Mr. Corzine said.

Mr. Bush's budget also offers up what the White House is deliberately framing as an election-year battle: the president's call to make his trillion-dollar tax cuts permanent. Democrats have denounced the president for what they say is a fiscally reckless plan, which Republicans say is just what Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political adviser, wanted. Mr. Bush can then run, they say, as the candidate who will not raise taxes.

Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster, said that although voters were clearly concerned about the economy "actual voting behavior shows, guess what, people don't want their taxes raised.

"It's a battle that unites our party," Mr. McInturff said, "and separates us from the Democrats."

Mr. Bush is not expected to face a major battle with Congress over the military budget, which he proposed to increase to $401 billion, an amount that brings him close to the height of the Reagan-era military buildup. But budget analysts noted that many of the big-ticket items driving the increase %G—%@ like new fighter planes, helicopters and a destroyer for the Navy %G—%@ were not directed specifically at fighting terrorism.

"Most of the stuff they're buying is really for conventional kinds of foes," said Steve Kosiak of the Center for Strategy and Budgetary Assessments. "It's not geared to classic antiterrorist activities."


